Just before we get started,
I want to mention another channel that I host called mega projects.
Mega projects is a channel all about mankind's greatest achievements,
where I take a deep look at incredible buildings, projects, and structures,
and more whether it's the world's most impressive skyscrapers,
the international space station or chin noble sarcophagus,
a cover it all new channels come out a couple of times a week on mega projects.
So if you think that could be for you, please do head over there and subscribe.
There is a link in the description below and let's get into it.
The Spanish flu was the single worst disease episode in modern world history
in the space of 18 months in 1918 to 1919,
it's four epidemic waves, skilled tens of millions of people around the globe.
Ravaging,
a population that had already been exhausted by the mass killing tactics of the
war to end wars in the video today,
we're gonna look at the Spanish flu from three perspectives first,
how did it across the world and what was his impact on the everyday lives of
ordinary individuals?
Then we will profile this invisible killer seeking to understand its origins and
murderous methods. And finally, we will assess the death, toll it,
inflicted on the human species and see what we can learn from the experience.
And with that said, let's get into it.
The term Spanish is of course, AMI Noma.
It would be more appropriate to call this the great influenza pan and me of 1918
to 1919. So I will use both terms.
The epidemic did not originate in Spain.
It received this honorary citizenship only because Spain was a neutral country
in world war I and its press was free from censorship to report first about
this mysterious disease, the origins of the pandemic lay elsewhere, though,
most recounts placed the first outbreak at a us army training base camp.
Funston in Kansas in mid-March 1918.
It is here that this flu virus reaped its first 48 victims,
but we'll never know for certain, if that was the true starting point.
The online archive of California holds in their Spanish flu section letter
written by a young recruit. Roy from camp Logan,
Texas on the 1st of March, 1918, heli meant we played another funeral today.
One of the lads from company one died. I knew him real well.
Another funeral on the 1st of March would imply that soldiers had been dying
throughout February,
but the origins of the great flu can be traced even earlier than
1918 as early as 1916 and 1917 army camps in France
and in England had been ravaged by an unknown respiratory disease.
At the time it had been described as pale bronchitis,
but its symptoms resembled those of the Spanish flu. However,
these outbreaks did not spread beyond the two military bases and had died down
by April,
1917 historian mark Humphreys of Canada's Memorial university of Newfoundland in
2014 proposed another origin story.
Humphreys found archival evidence that a respiratory illness that struck
Northern are in November,
1917 was identified a year later by Chinese health officials as identical to the
Spanish flu from China.
British officials organized the transport of 94,000 laborers to the Western
France van, north America,
as part of an auxiliary core in charge of digging trenches and maintaining
supply lines. The laborers were sailed to Vancouver on the Canadian west coast,
then loaded onto trains to Halifax on the east coast,
from which they could be sent to Europe.
The press was forbidden from reporting on these transports and the trains had
been sealed.
Both were meant as a precaution in order to protect the laborers from widespread
anti-Chinese sentiments, but the unintended effects,
it may have been to further the contagion among the auxiliary ranks some
3000 of them while traveling through Canada were quarantined with flu-like
symptoms. And of course, newspapers could not publish a single word about it.
Meaning the infection trains could continue their Eastwood run.
The Chinese laborers arrived in Southern Englands by January,
1918 and were sent to France where a hospital was Noel sume, uh,
recorded hundreds of their deaths from respiratory illness,
whether because of the Chinese laborers or us army recruits,
large movements of troops were accountable for the rapid diffusion of the virus
between may and July.
The great flu had spread across virtually the whole of north and central
America, as well as Europe and Asia.
The prov of region in Russia wrote that the Spanish lady had thrown a whole town
Miran into disarray.
The times of India are reported that nearly every house has some of its inmates
down with influenza E and every office is be wailing.
The absence of Clarks the epidemic had an obvious impact on the war,
which was still raging, especially on the Western France German general,
Eric LUN DOF complained that it was a grievous business having to listen every
morning to the chief of staff's recital of the number of influenza cases and
their complaints about the weakness of their troops.
He would later even blame the failure of his spring, offensive on the virus.
This was all the first wave, which seemed bad at the time.
And it actually was pretty bad,
but it was nothing compared to what was gonna come next.
During the first sweep of the Spanish lady,
the influenza virus probably went through a mutation process,
which made it much deadlier. This, uh,
enhanced killer made its first appearance in late August of 1918.
When the second wave took off almost simultaneously from three major wartime
ports, Boston USA,
breast and France and Freetown in Sierra Leone from the three ports,
thousands of sailors,
soldiers and civilian travelers became vectors for the virus aboard their ship.
In a matter of weeks,
the infected spread the disease across the four corners of the globe with only a
handful of remote locations being spared the ordeal.
The second way of drag down throughout the whole of autumn and the early winter
of 1919, the ends war on the 11th of November,
1918 did not mitigate the onslaught. Arguably it just made it worse.
Millions of soldiers, D demobilized,
hundreds of thousands of POWs returned home carrying an unwanted stowaway
inside their lungs.
A whole generation of young men had been decimated by artillery,
weaponized gas machine gunfire,
and who survived were likely to die because of a single droplet of
saliva. It took only one single virus inside a single droplet,
outta 40,000 dejected by a single sneeze. And just like that,
you were infected the feeling of the fragility of life in those times
is captured by the everyday correspondence ordinary people in September, 1918,
a post officer worker in Plymouth,
Massachusetts wrote to his wife about the grueling conditions he works in in
order to ensure a continuing service submits the constant death caused by the
flu. I have some more, very bad news to write you.
And I guess if things keep on that by the ends of the year,
there will be nobody left in town. Ashley died yesterday.
Herald will be buried just as soon as his body arrives and there will be no
funeral. On Friday. We had seven funerals and Saturday about as many.
So you see what we are up against in Brockton three days last week,
there was one every hour on the 11th of October,
a recruiting training in Michigan wrote to a friends this in his camp,
50 die every day from it from the 16th to the 27th of October,
a series of letters from Mrs. Alma senior to her daughter,
Alma junior show how unbreakable a mother's love can be writing from Rochester,
New York,
Mrs. Alma worries that her daughter is safe and healthy in her college in
Ontario, Canada.
Some of them motherly advice resonates with what you hear these days.
She wrote was just wondering how you were getting in these days of epidemic in
the country. It is fierce and so many dying over here is something awful.
People are dying and it's awful.
Don't worry off threats because you can only walk in the yard.
Be glad you can do that. Keep in fresh air or you can and keep warm.
But your bath robot at night, hot lemonade at night is excellent for influenza,
Mrs. Alma,
then laments that she cannot help her other daughter with her little baby Jane,
because she is invalid at home.
And that it is impossible to get nurses while worrying about the wellbeing of
her daughters and doing what she could to help her granddaughter.
Mrs. Alma Zi with cancer baby, unable to,
to access medical care earlier because of the pandemic.
She was eventually hospitalized on the 27th of October and died on the 6th of
November on the 31st of October,
an official at the mayor's office of San Francisco took the initiative to notify
his counterpart in Santa Barbara about effective public health measures in a
city, sending this for your information,
because I have seen the whole terrible effect of epidemic here because masks
have saved untold suffering and many deaths.
And because Santa Barbara is my old home city,
the measure in place was simply the universal wearing of masks.
Three days after the use became general new cases in San Francisco dropped by
50%. But the daily death toll was above a hundred.
On the other side of the ponds,
London was being stricken as hard as New York state,
California and Ontario on the 28th of October, 1918 one,
Mrs. Bennett wrote things here are in a terrible state,
this new flu taking people off as they walk along the streets. In fact,
the takers can't turn the coffins out or bury the people quick enough.
There's family is of six or seven in one house lay dead on the same day.
An American soldier stationed in France wrote to his mother reassuring her that
the situation where he was stationed was not as bad as it was at another base
count Sherman.
He also mentioned that the French people have a way of treating the flu.
They make some kind of he of some kind of leaves.
Unfortunately he didn't provide the recipe.
Another series of letters from an American private provides a good example of
acquired immunity.
Martin Allos Khan known as Al was stationed at Cal forest George,
from where he wrote to his brother and to his best friends,
barley mourns the death of his Bunky Thomas. He was in relatively high spirits.
He had survived the great pandemic, not once, but twice.
I'm still in quarantine that I will be released today. I'm feeling great.
And the two days rest has done me, a world of good.
His main concern was that while in quarantine,
he had been neglecting the ladies.
So he asked his friend cliff to check on Ursula, Ella, Ida, Mary Rosemary,
English, and Maryanne.
So was our simply lucky in love and health? Well,
there is strong evidence suggesting that exposure to previous waves of the
Spanish flu could generate acquired immunity in those who had been infected,
but had survived research led by Dr.
Jay and Barry from Tulane and Xavier universities,
Louisiana highlighted how the first wave of the Spanish flu was characterized by
a high number of cases, but had a lower fatality rate than the second wave.
By looking at medical records of us soldiers,
he estimated that the fatality rate during the lethal autumn sweep was 4.7
in the spring. It had been only 1.1. However,
the deadly marriage of the second wave had largely spared.
Those who had previously been exposed in the spring,
the case of camp Dodge illustrates this perfectly here.
One regimen of troops that experienced the first wave while another regimen had
escaped it among those exposed in the spring,
only 6.6 became sick with flu that autumn in contrast,
among the troops not exposed in the spring,
a staggering 48.5% fellow during the second wave.
Now the witness accounts and research mentioned so far may refer to America or
Europe,
but this should not give the impression that other continents were spared.
Let's go back to September, 1918.
This is when Indian troops who had served on the Western front returned home.
The first outbreak took place in Bombay where mortality rate was more than 5% of
all the population.
The Spanish lady had now access to a huge new territory,
densely populated serviced by a large railway network.
It was the perfect storm in just a month.
The flu had spread to Sri Lanka and to the Northern provinces reaping and
estimated 14 to 18 million lives.
The highest death are recorded in a single country. Also in September,
a troop transport sales off Bombay to on BAA Kenya.
Of course the virus was AOW away.
The infection spread to members of the Kenyan carrier Corps,
who were just about to be demobilized. As they returned home,
they carried the contagion inlands,
adding to the death doll caused by the other two major African outbreaks
originating in Sierra Leone and South Africa. Most of Africa had been spar.
The first wave,
meaning that the autumn burst had truly scorched through the continents towns
like Kimberley add Ababa and win lost over 4% of their populations
flew. The bulk of the victims were between 18 and 40.
So the effect on society was disastrous in terms of loss of labor,
reproductive capacity and family structures. It was a sudden demographic,
social and economic attack trophy without precedent back in India, by November,
the rate of contagion had largely subsided.
It is speculated that this was due to the onset of the monsoon season.
As humid climates are not favorable to flu viruses.
The March of the invisible Tyran nonetheless continued eastward reaching China
until now the majority of the victims worldwide had been aged 15 to 34 and
bracket unusual for influenza pandemics.
We'll find out later why this group was particularly targeted in China.
The second wave prayed on an even younger cohort. Children aged 11 to 15.
Overall the mortality rate was much lower compared to India and other countries.
Researchers from the Hong Kong Institute of Chinese medicine,
theorized that traditional Chinese might have actually played a part remedies
put in place by local government included spraying houses with a lime water or
burning rhubarb and root stalk to disinfect the app for prevention villages were
advised to drink Hmong bean soup and rock sugar gap.
Another explanation is one hinted out earlier since the pandemic had originated
there, Chinese citizen said already developed an immunity to it.
By early months of 1919,
the rage of the pandemic was relatively tamed and I stressed relatively there.
The early spring of the year,
saw a third wave making the rounds throughout the globe,
although it did not match the speed reach and variance of the autumn wave.
It was still deadly on March the fifth, 1919, a young Canadian man,
Harold wrote to a friend in Illinois. I,
there are an awful lot of people dying right now on account of the flu.
A little girl next door was buried today and there is a lady up the street that
is pretty sick and my little sister is just getting over it.
So I guess it is pretty near my turn. We don't know if Harold made it or not.
The third sweep was followed by a fourth wave, less severe,
which lingered on in locations, such as Scandinavia,
the south Atlantic and Sicily.
It is still debated whether this was a mutated strain of the original virus or a
new one altogether.
One of the final victims of the fourth wave was a little girl PMO,
Rosa Lombardo. She had been born on the 13th of December,
1918 at the height of the autumn flu in Europe and passed away aged only two on
the 6th of December, 1920. Her father,
a agreed by such a sudden and meaningless death asked for her body to be
preserved as if she was still asleep. Moncur later,
Rosalia can still be seen sleeping in the Capuchin CHUs of Paramo.
This unwiting Memorial to the great pandemic is now known as the most beautiful
money in Europe
At a high level, flu viruses are divided into four types,
a to D and type A's can be divided into further subcategories
depending on the subtypes of two proteins present on their surface.
These are helut in H and neuraminidase N the
influenza responsible for the 1918 pandemic was identified as being a type
a H one N one subtype viruses of the a H one N one type are
actually quite common among humans,
but we'll find out later what made this specific virus so special and quite
so lethal a 2001 study suggested that the 1918 virus may have originated
in swine hosts before moving on to humans.
But another investigation in 2005 suggested a more likely source was
birds. The enteric tracts of waterfowl,
such as ducks and geese are known to be the reservoirs for all known influenza,
a viruses for those of you notey with physiology or anatomy,
the enteric tract is the nervous system that regulates the digestion within
the original host. Let's say a duck. The virus may mutate over time,
either independently or by recombination with a gene segment from a different
virus. Now that the pathogen is mutated,
it's ready to jump species usually from avian to Mamal and attack a new
type of cell. For example, those lining the lungs. This is,
is almost certainly what happened to the Spanish flu strain.
And we should stress almost in two separate studies of 1999 and
2005 Oxford university in the Atlanta center for disease control were able to
reconstruct the genome of the original virus.
What they found is that the 1918 influenza was composed of eight gene segments.
So all from any of the hundreds of both avian and mamalian virus that's
collected since 1917, this was literally one of the kinds,
the unique quality made it impossible to ascertain who or what could have been
the original host of the virus and how it evolved into its lethal final form.
Another clue normally,
outbreaks of viruses with an avian origin are preceded by large die offs of
poultry or other bird populations that this was not the case within 1918
pandemic. The initial animal host the patient's alpha is still unidentified.
One thing was clear about the 1918 H one N one virus its Vince and
pathogenicity were unrivaled compared to other viruses,
which both preceded it and followed it to clarify these points.
Pathogen is defined as the,
of an infectious agent to cause disease or damage in a host virulence on the
other hand is a measure of the severity of said disease.
A microorganism can be pathogenic or not. If it is pathogenic,
its virulence can vary from mild to fatal let's look at
pathogenicity first contemporary normal flu viruses require presence of the
enzyme Tripps in,
in their human host in order to replicate the 1918 virus instead could
proliferate even in the absence of Tripps in making it more pathogenic than
other viruses,
the Spanish flu also displayed a unique capacity to proliferate at high rates in
site human bronchial cells. And that explains its virulence little by little,
a picture of the killer was emerging.
Thanks to modern researchers in the role of crime scene investigators or
criminal profilers.
The next step was to understand how Mr type a H one N one of the 1918
class actually killed what was its modus opera Randi and Dr. David
MOS of the national Institute of allergy and infectious diseases in Maryland in
2007, he reviewed autopsy records for influenza casualties in the 1918 to
1919 period and identified two overlapping syndromes,
which caused the death of the infected hosts in at least 85 to 90% of cases,
patients suffered from an acute viral infection that spread down the respiratory
tracted causing severe tissue damage inside the lungs.
The damaged tissue was then invaded by a so-called secondary invasion.
It wasn't a virus this time,
but rather bacteria pathogens like strepto Carcas or STAARs,
which invade the damaged lungs causing cases of aggressive broncho pneumonia.
In other words, the killer virus did not act alone, but had accomplices.
The actions of these cohorts eventually led to severe pulmonary hemorrhage and
necrosis or tissue death within the bronch eye.
The remaining 10 to 15% of fatal cases suffered from a R D S or acute
respiratory distress like syndrome patients with this syndrome could be easily
identified by their peculiar B Lu gray facial discoloration,
typical sign of drowning because, well, that's essentially what was happening.
The virus caused the pulmonary blood vessels to exude huge amounts of thin
watery droplets, which clogged the lung tissue. In other words,
these patients were drowning in a liquid created by their own bodies.
So now that we've clarified the modus opera, Andi of the killer,
we have to understand its peculiar choice of victims.
Normally flu epidemics claim, most of their victims among the elderly,
but the Spanish flu had a clear pre action for a younger demographic.
Those aged between 15 and 34,
a lower than expected mortality among the elderly may have been explained by
acquired immunity,
individuals aged 40 and over may have been exposed to one of the three flu
pandemics of the 19th century in 18 30,
18 47 or 1889. Although not everybody agrees,
unlike the 1918 strain,
these previous viruses not cause aggressive broncho,
pneumonia or lung hemorrhage,
we may have more convincing answers explaining why the death rate was higher
among the young ones, Dr. Robert Snellgrove from Imperial college,
London among others has theorized the notion of these so-called cytokines storm
cytokines are proteins released by cells to interact with each other and to
trigger specific Vic processes. For example, internal inflammation,
a common reaction of the body against infections,
a younger organism would naturally release more cytokines than an elderly one.
In the case,
if the Spanish flu the cells of the infected younger patients release a
deleterious excess of cytokines,
leading to excessive inflammation of the lungs, and more importantly,
tissue necrosis,
ironically younger fitter organisms deployed a stronger reaction to protect
themselves of reaction, which eventually claimed their lives.
Shortly after the last wave had died down, the scientific community,
tried to take stock of the magnitude of the disaster. American bacteriologist,
Edwin Oaks. Jordan was one of the first to calculate the death toll,
which she estimated to be in the vicinity of 21.5 million people.
The number in itself is staggering. Compare it to the casual of the great war,
which was about 10 million dead soldiers killed over a period of four and a half
years.
The Spanish flu killed twice as many people over a little more than a year.
Now let's compare it to the world's population in 1918. At that time,
there were 1.8 billion people on the planet.
The Spanish flu killed 1.2% of them.
If we apply that ratio to today's elation,
that would've been a death toll of more than 93 million people.
Oak Jordan's estimates stood for decades,
but it was later challenged as being too low. First in 1986,
publication calculated the mortality in India alone to be at 18 million people
subsequently in 1991, authors,
David Patterson and Gerald P Hal proposed another estimate placing the death
toll between 25 and 40 million victims.
But was that the definitive number?
Probably not the 2002 study by Dr. Neal Johnson and Dr. Y and Muller
suggested that the previous numbers may have been underestimated due to common
issues such as missing records, misdiagnosis or death certificates,
compiled by non-medical personnel.
Not only that deaths among indigenous populations and colonial dominions may
have been overlooked, ignored,
or simply not reported to the colonial authorities. Also,
most of the reports collected at time of the pandemic referred to deaths,
taking place during the major wave of autumn, winter, influenza mortality,
before and after that wave may have been ignored or reported under other causes
of death, such as pneumonia, all in all,
considering all these instances of under reporting Johnson,
Mueller placed their estimate in a range from 50 to 100 million debt.
And let's stop for a second just to consider that a hundred million debt the
entire us population at the time was just 108 million.
The whole of Latin America had only 57 million inhabitants.
Sometimes numbers may not be enough to represent the sheer scale of a tragedy.
So just think about it this way. In a matter of a few months,
one USA or two Latin Americas had been completely wiped out by a
microscopic being, which had likely originated in the bowels of a duck.
In all honesty,
the more we researched the death told the more we found conflicting accounts
ranging from the top counts of a hundred million down to 18 million.
We will likely never know how many people did not get to see the next year
because of the great killer of 1918 and 1919.
In our grim research,
we also came across an even Bleaker notion how many victims didn't even get to
see their first day of life. In other words,
the impact of the great influenza on unborn children,
Dr. Bloom Fe back of Mount Sinai school of medicine,
New York and her team have examined the relationship between influenza and birth
rates during the great pandemic in the us, Denmark, Sweden, and Norway,
the analysis showed a decline in birth rates for all examined populations in the
spring of 1919.
This decline presented a 15% drop below baseline levels recorded before the
pandemic. This mortality depression reached its maximum levels.
About six months after the pandemic peak of the previous autumn.
This suggested that the decline in births could be attributed to a surge in
first trimester, miscarriages,
which affected about 10% of all women who were pregnant at the peak of the
pandemic.
The conclusion of the bloom fesh bark team is that the virus was directly
responsible for the miscarriages.
And the 10% incidence rate may have been an underestimation as they point out in
1919 report of 1,350 pregnant women with influenza showed how
more than a quarter of them had miscarried. The concepts of so many babies,
not even being born is hard to accept,
but the same study revealed another finding,
which shows that regardless of the disaster,
our species is always capable of bouncing back.
The dip in birth rates in spring of 1919 was followed by a compensator
mortality increase in late autumn, 19, 19 and early spring, 1920,
when mortality significantly exceeded the expected rates,
the resurgence of births confirmed that fertility was not permanently impacted.
Humanity could slowly rebuild itself,
lick the wounds inflicted by the double tragedy of the great war and the great
pan endemic and slowly return to normal return to a daily life and to historical
periods that was going to be devoid of war famine and disease.
At least according to some leaders,
a period which turned out to only be a 20 year truce.
But while that's another story,
Back in 2004,
a team at the Harvard school of public health had modeled the transmissibility
patterns of the 1918 virus.
More precisely they calculated its reproductive number are in relation to
its serial interval.
V the R number tells us how many secondary patients are produced by each primary
patient.
The V value is the average time expressed in days between a primary and a
secondary case.
The team evaluated that the 1919 virus had an R zero value of two
to four in late terms,
the infected patient could infect four more patients in less than a day.
This may sound like a high rate of contagion. However,
the researchers pointed out that this was not that high in relation to other
influenza subtypes in their estimation,
a similar pandemic could be prevented by vaccinating or administering antiviral
prophylaxis to 50 to 75% of the population. And that sounds pretty easy,
but it depends on how well prepared a national health system is when it comes to
facing such emergencies,
stock bowels of vaccines and antivirals may or may not be enough,
or these drugs might not be available at all,
still progressing through the early stages of a clinical trial.
There's also the anti problem that flu viruses may be transmitted before the
onset of defining signs and symptoms. In other words,
people infect each other even before they appear to be sick,
what's left to do well. Our quote directly from the clinical paper,
this implies that measures that generally reduce contacts between persons,
regardless of infection.
Status may be our most powerful protection against a pandemic until adequate
vaccine and antiviral medicines can be produced at which point mass vaccination
and prophylaxis may be more if effective than targeted approaches and with
what's going on in the world today, we hope that this video,
this message perhaps has resonated with you. You've heard it a million times.
We've all heard it until we are through this current emergency.
Staying at home is our most powerful protection. Stay at home, stay safe,
watch some biographics and thank you for watching. Okay.